title: Four Years On, Umoci Celebrates A Long-Awaited Release
author: Aleksa Sarai
published: 2025-05-25 21:05:00
updated: 2025-05-25 21:05:00
short_description: >
  At long-last a new blog post, and a new release of umoci!
description: >
  At long-last a new blog post, and a new release of umoci! It's been a good
  four years since the last umoci release and six years since my last blog
  post, so let's make it a quick one.
tags:
  - oci
  - umoci
  - containers

To borrow a phrase, "hello there."

Long time no see. I'm sure you know how the world has gone since my last blog
post in 2019, but let's just say my life definitely went in a different
direction to the one I was expecting. (Though I'm sure that's a very unoriginal
observation.) I have a few more draft blog posts I'm planning to release soon,
but for now let's get down to brass tacks.

After a nearly four-year hiatus, [there is a new umoci release][umoci-v0.5]!

Since I've only mentioned it in passing before, [umoci][umoci-site] is the
reference implementation of the [Open Container Initiative (OCI)][oci]
[image-spec][oci-image-spec], and provides users with the ability to create,
manipulate, and otherwise interact with container images. It is designed to be
as small and unopinionated as possible, so as to act as a foundation for larger
systems to be built on top of.

I originally wrote umoci back in 2016 to allow SUSE to create container images
natively with [our existing OS image build system called Kiwi][kiwi], which is
in turn used by the [Open Build Service][obs] (not to be confused with [the
*other* OBS][wrong-obs]) to automatically build all of openSUSE and SUSE's base
container images. At the time there was no real tool to do
this<sup>&dagger;</sup>, and so I sat down and wrote one to generate OCI images
and then [implemented support for converting OCI images to Docker images in a
way that didn't require a Docker daemon][skopeo-docker-archive-pr] -- something
that we couldn't require for OBS builds (not to mention it makes little sense
to require Docker just to generate some tar archives).

I'm not sure that me from nearly 10 years ago (dear lord...) thought it would
continue to be such a core part of our build infrastructure at SUSE, nor that
it would end up becoming the reference implementation of the OCI image
specification. It also bears mentioning that umoci has seen a fair amount of
use outside of SUSE -- the notably very-much-not-OCI-thank-you-very-much
[LXC][lxc] and [Incus][incus] container runtimes both use umoci to provide
support for OCI images, and the fairly unique [Stacker][stacker] build system
uses umoci for its own builds. The main reason that I think umoci has found
such varied usage is because it is quite unopinionated and acts like a trusty
multi-tool you can adapt for any situation involving container images.

> &dagger;: This is actually a little bit more nuanced. There *was* a tool
> called [`oci-image-tool`][oci-image-tool] that it would be unfair to leave
> unmentioned, but I will talk about that [a little later][#oci-image-tool].

[umoci-v0.5]: https://github.com/opencontainers/umoci/releases/tag/v0.5.0
[umoci-site]: https://umo.ci/
[oci]: https://opencontainers.org/
[oci-image-spec]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec
[kiwi]: https://osinside.github.io/kiwi/
[obs]: https://openbuildservice.org/
[wrong-obs]: https://obsproject.com/
[skopeo-docker-archive-pr]: https://github.com/containers/image/pull/148
[lxc]: https://linuxcontainers.org/lxc
[incus]: https://linuxcontainers.org/incus
[stacker]: https://github.com/project-stacker/stacker
[oci-image-tool]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-tools

### What's New? ###

Despite the long wait, for most users there are only a handful of notable
features and improvements added in this release (the most notable is support
for zstd-compressed images -- an image-spec v1.1 feature that is getting used
more and more in the wild). There was also a fix for a performance regression
in the last release (though it's been so long that maybe it's better to call it
a "performance improvement" at this point). Unfortunately, full image-spec v1.1
support is not included yet, [for reasons I will outline
later][#image-spec-update].

The bulk of the changes were code modernisation changes (Go 1.13 errors were
still somewhat new back in 2021), as well as some very large overhauls and
improvements to overlayfs support (something that is used by [Stacker][stacker]
but is definitely not widely used). You can find a more detailed list of
changes in [our changelog][umoci-changelog]. There are still [a fair number of
things that I would like to get done in umoci][umoci-issues], but a 4-year gap
between releases means that a release was more than overdue.

So, why did it take so long? Well, there are quite a few reasons but the main
technical one is that I had planned for [image-spec v1.1][image-spec-v1.1]
support to be included in this release but unfortunately there are a cacophony
of issues that made this too big of a job that I kept putting it off. But
first, we need to talk a little bit about the historical relationship between
`oci-image-tool` and umoci.

[stacker]: https://github.com/project-stacker/stacker
[umoci-changelog]: https://umo.ci/meta/changelog
[umoci-issues]: https://github.com/opencontainers/umoci/issues
[image-spec-v1.1]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/releases/tag/v1.1.0

### oci-image-tool <a id="hdr-oci-image-tool"></a> ###
[#oci-image-tool]: #hdr-oci-image-tool

Before umoci, there was a tool called [`oci-image-tool`][oci-image-tool] which
was a collection of small helpers to do some limited operations on OCI images.

Now, I am going to talk about the shortcomings of `oci-image-tool` in this
section, but I don't want this to be interpreted as an attack on the folks who
worked on it (myself included). There were a variety of factors that resulted
in `oci-image-tool` ending up in the situation it is today, and I would never
stoop to think that my own projects don't have their own substantial
shortcomings.

At the time, the problem I was trying to solve was that we needed a simple tool
that Kiwi could use to create our OS container images directly without needing
to use Docker itself. The system we were using then was based around generating
a `tar` archive and then submitting a pull request to [the
`docker-library/official-images` repo][docker-library] which is used for
building all of the "official library" Docker images, which were based on
`Dockerfile`s. Our `Dockerfile` was just a single `ADD` statement to the
`rootfs.tar.xz` archive generated by Kiwi, stored in a GitHub repo. Given that
OBS was (and still is) a far superior build system for distributions, this kind
of setup was quite unfortunate. We would ideally just push our images directly
to a registry (or even better, host our own registry that is managed by OBS).
And for that we needed a tool to generate Docker images (though [with a bit of
work][skopeo-docker-archive-pr] we could generate OCI images and convert them
using skopeo).

I was also a bit disappointed by the lack of an image-spec equivalent to the
runtime-spec's [runc][runc] -- that is, a relatively unopinionated and flexible
reference implementation of the specification. Now, runc's relationship to OCI
is a little bit of a historical oddity (runc was donated to the OCI before) but
I really wanted to be able to just run a few commands to download an image,
unpack it, and spawn a container with `runc`.

It was clear from the outset that `oci-image-tool` would not be enough for
everything we needed (the design was incomaptible with any kind of incremental
build system where you progressively modify a rootfs and create new layers).
But my first thought was "no matter, we could create a small wrapper around
`oci-image-tool`'s APIs". And that was the first incarnation of umoci, it was a
fairly minimal set of wrappers around `oci-image-tool`. The only real added
feature was the usage of [`go-mtree`][go-mtree] to generate a manifest we could
use to generate diff layers relatively efficiently.

And if `oci-image-tool` had been able to do what we needed, maybe those small
extra features would've been folded into `oci-image-tool` or Kiwi and umoci
would only have ended up being a small prototype that disappeared after a few
months.

Unfortunately, it turns out that `oci-image-tool` was (in my view) basically
only useful as a proof-of-concept and had several very severe bugs that made it
unusable for our needs ([there is a list of them in the project
README][oci-image-tool-readme]). I initially sent patches to try to improve
the situation but it became more and more clear that there was a deeper design
issue, at which point I ended up reimplementing all of the parts of
`oci-image-tool` we were using, with the intention of pushing the new API back
into `oci-image-tool`. Unfortunately, it eventually seemed that there was a
lack of interest in doing this (which I understand -- I was basically
suggesting that I replace most of the code with code that I wrote). I did
become a maintainer of `oci-image-tool` but development behind `oci-image-tool`
basically stalled soon after umoci was ready for use, and as a project we ended
up pushing people to use umoci for image unpacking and repacking.

After being used in production for a few years, in 2020 I put forward a
proposal that umoci be added to the OCI as a reference implementation, and [the
proposal was accepted][tob-umoci-pr]. As part of the discussion of that
proposal, the OCI Technical Oversight Board felt that `oci-image-tool` (which
had not received any real development work for a few years at that point)
should probably be retired in favour of umoci.

[docker-library]: https://github.com/docker-library/official-images
[runc]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runc
[go-mtree]: https://github.com/vbatts/go-mtree
[tob-umoci-pr]: https://github.com/opencontainers/tob/pull/67
[oci-image-tool-readme]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-tools/blob/master/README.md#project-status

### So, what about image-spec v1.1? <a id="hdr-image-spec-update"></a> ###
[#image-spec-update]: #hdr-image-spec-update

So far I have neglected to mention that there is one feature from
`oci-image-tool` that umoci currently cannot do -- validating that an image
conforms to the specification.

For background, ever since I first started developing umoci, I always wanted to
make sure we had strict validation of our generated images so that there would
be no question that our project was producing valid images. Even today, most of
the run time of our test suite is running image-spec validation against our
images at every stage of our tests. And the only tool that currently exists for
image-spec validation is `oci-image-tool validate`.

Unfortunately, the image-spec validation tools have not been actively developed
for many years and cannot handle [image-spec v1.1][image-spec-v1.1] (and the
rest of the features of image-tools have been deprecated by the existence of
umoci). The codebase is so old (it's still using `Godep`, for the few
old-timers who remember what that is...) [that we have to hack around the repo
in our CI][oci-image-tool-ci-hack] in order to build it in a form that can
actually validate images.

As part of the discussion to add umoci to the OCI as a reference
implementation, there were talks about taking `oci-image-tool validate` and
merging it into umoci so that umoci could do validation of images and so that
the `oci-image-tool` repo could be archived.

However, in practice this will require rewriting most (if not all) of the
validation code just for umoci's test suite -- and there is a decent argument
to make that having the validation code live in the same repo as the
implementation is not nearly as useful a check for bugs in our implementation.
I would also want to be able to validate against multiple versions of the
image-spec, which is something that `oci-image-tool validate` (nor the
image-spec Go jsonschema APIs) support.

I'm still of two minds about what I should do. I think it's important to have
proper validation code for specifications, but at this point it seems
*overwhelmingly* obvious that umoci is the only project actually validating
their image-spec images and I don't really want to take on even more
maintainership burden for code that it seems nobody except us uses. But I also
don't want to just remove the validation we do in our tests -- what if we
subtly break something but in a way that `umoci` cannot detect? And not doing
anything is what leads to 4-year gaps between releases.

A similar story is true for the runtime-spec validation, and is the
reason why umoci isn't using [runtime-spec v1.2][runtime-spec-v1.2] (though
this is less critical for umoci because we generate a fairly standard
runtime-spec configuration).

I'm open to suggestions, but I am leaning towards just sitting down and
rewriting the validation code so we can put this whole issue behind us. When
will I have enough time for what (in my view) qualifies as pure busy work is a
different question...

[image-spec-v1.1]: https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/releases/tag/v1.1.0
[oci-image-tool-ci-hack]: https://github.com/opencontainers/umoci/blob/v0.5.0/Dockerfile#L77
[runtime-spec-v1.2]: https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/releases/tag/v1.2.0

### What's Next? ###

As I said, there are [a lot of things I would like to do with
umoci][umoci-issues], and I have recently felt more invigorated about working
on it than I have for some time, but it never feels like I have enough time so
knowing what to prioritise would be very useful.

If you are an umoci user, feel free to let me know what features or
improvements you would prefer I focus on. While umoci is not a particularly
exciting project, I've always felt that it was well positioned to be a
dependable workhorse (and the users I know of seem to agree with that
sentiment).

[umoci-issues]: https://github.com/opencontainers/umoci/issues
